day_05/notes.md, before:

# Day 05 - Description

The task is to validate and, if necessary, reorder print job updates based on a set of page ordering rules. Each update consists of a sequence of pages, and the ordering rules dictate the relative order between specific pairs of pages (`X|Y`, meaning page `X` must appear before page `Y`). The challenge is divided into two parts:

1. **Part 1: Validate Updates**  
   - Identify which updates adhere to the ordering rules.
   - For valid updates, calculate the "middle page" (median page number) and sum these values.

2. **Part 2: Correct Invalid Updates**  
   - For updates that violate the ordering rules, reorder the pages to conform.
   - Calculate the middle page of the corrected updates and sum these values.

Link to complete description: https://adventofcode.com/2024/day/5

## Approach/Algorithm

### Part 1
- We only care about if there are rule breaks and if there is a single valid rule. 
- Create a hashmap `HashMap<u16, Vec<u16>>` to keep track of rules, and use a `Vec<String>` for keeping track of updates
- For each update, we do a rule check (which I do in multiple threads)
- If there is a rule break, we stop checking the update
  - Only one rule break is required and then we would exit the loop
- If there is a valid rule that can apply, then we add the middle number of the update string to the total sum
  - Only one valid rule is required to be found. We check all rule breaks before, so either the rule applies, or it doesn't. 

## Result

### Part 1

```text
real    0m0,062s
user    0m0,056s
sys     0m0,022s
```

### Part 2

Before optimization: 
```text
real    2m6,008s
user    6m8,027s
sys     0m0,285s
```

There was some optimization done for the repairing of an update sequence
- Instead of `remove` and then `insert`, I used `swap` which does the same, but much faster!
- Early break on check if the key was not the sequence 

Final best time: 
```text
real    0m0,089s
user    0m0,235s
sys     0m0,022s
```

Commit message:

add: notes on algorithm part 2 day 5

day_05/notes.md, after:

# Day 05 - Description

The task is to validate and, if necessary, reorder print job updates based on a set of page ordering rules. Each update consists of a sequence of pages, and the ordering rules dictate the relative order between specific pairs of pages (`X|Y`, meaning page `X` must appear before page `Y`). The challenge is divided into two parts:

1. **Part 1: Validate Updates**  
   - Identify which updates adhere to the ordering rules.
   - For valid updates, calculate the "middle page" (median page number) and sum these values.

2. **Part 2: Correct Invalid Updates**  
   - For updates that violate the ordering rules, reorder the pages to conform.
   - Calculate the middle page of the corrected updates and sum these values.

Link to complete description: https://adventofcode.com/2024/day/5

## Approach/Algorithm

### Part 1
- We only care about if there are rule breaks and if there is a single valid rule. 
- Create a hashmap `HashMap<u16, Vec<u16>>` to keep track of rules, and use a `Vec<String>` for keeping track of updates
- For each update, we do a rule check (which I do in multiple threads)
- If there is a rule break, we stop checking the update
  - Only one rule break is required and then we would exit the loop
- If there is a valid rule that can apply, then we add the middle number of the update string to the total sum
  - Only one valid rule is required to be found. We check all rule breaks before, so either the rule applies, or it doesn't. 

### Part 2 
- We only care about the broken update statements
- Find a broken update statement and use the repair method
  - It takes the sequence of numbers and returns the middle number of the repaired list
  - It repairs by swapping the indexes of the key and value of a `Rule`, such that the rule is satisfied 
  - It rechecks if the update is now correct for all rules
  - Does this until the rule are fixed!
- Sum all repaired middle numbers 

## Result

### Part 1

```text
real    0m0,062s
user    0m0,056s
sys     0m0,022s
```

### Part 2

Before optimization: 
```text
real    2m6,008s
user    6m8,027s
sys     0m0,285s
```

There was some optimization done for the repairing of an update sequence
- Instead of `remove` and then `insert`, I used `swap` which does the same, but much faster!
- Early break on check if the key was not the sequence 

Final best time: 
```text
real    0m0,089s
user    0m0,235s
sys     0m0,022s
```
